Substituted. with effect from. PREFACE This edition of the Constitution of India reproduces the text of the Constitution of India as amended by Parliament from time to time.
The foot notes below the text indicate the Constitution Amendment Acts by which such amendments have been made.
The Constitution applies to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with certain exceptions and modifications as provided in article 370 and the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954. This Order has been included in Appendix I for facility of reference.
Appendix II contains a re-statement of the exceptions and modifications.
The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015 containing details of acquired and transferred territories between the Governments of India and Bangladesh has been included in Appendix V. The text of the constitutional amendments relating to the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 and the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, which have not yet come into force, have been provided in the text at the appropriate places wherever possible or otherwise in the footnote. New Delhi; Dr. G Narayana Raju, I*" April, 2019.
Secretary to the Government of India. THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA CONTENTS PREAMBLE PART1 THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY ARTICLES 1.
Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States. Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental and consequential matters. PART II CITIZENSHIP Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.
Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.
Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India.
Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be citizens. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.
PART III FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS General Definition. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.
Right to Equality Equality before law.
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
Abolition of Untouchability.
Abolition of titles.
Right to Freedom Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.
Protection of life and personal liberty. ARTICLES 21A.
Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation 23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc. Right to Freedom of Religion 25.
Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion. 26.
Freedom to manage religious affairs.
27.
Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion.
Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions.
Cultural and Educational Rights 29. Protection of interests of minorities.
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
Saving of Laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc. 31B.
[Omitted.] 33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to Forces, etc. 34.
Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area.
Application of the principles contained in this Part.
38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people.
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State. 39A.
Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases.
Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief. 43.
Living wage, etc., for workers.
Participation of workers in management of industries.
Uniform civil code for the citizens.
Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years. 46.
Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.
Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.
Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.
Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wild life.
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance.
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.
Promotion of international peace and security.
PART IVA FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 51A.
Fundamental duties.
PART V THE UNION CHAPTER I—THE EXECUTIVE The President and Vice-President 52. The President of India.
53.
Executive power of the Union.
56. Term of office of President.
Eligibility for re-election.
Oath or affirmation by the President.
61. Procedure for impeachment of the President. 62.
65. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President. 66.
Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President or Vice-President. ARTICLES 72 73.
Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
Extent of executive power of the Union.
Council of Ministers Council of Ministers to aid and advise President.
Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Attorney-General for India Attorney-General for India.
Conduct of Government Business Conduct of business of the Government of India.
Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc. CHAPTER II—PARLIAMENT General Constitution of Parliament.
Readjustment after each census.
Duration of Houses of Parliament.
Qualification for membership of Parliament.
Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.
Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.
Special address by the President.
Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.
Officers of Parliament The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy Chairman.
Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
Secretariat of Parliament.
Conduct of Business .
Oath or affirmation by members.
Disqualifications for membership.
Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members 105.
Salaries and allowances of members.
Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
Definition of “Money Bills”.
Annual financial statement. 113.
Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.
Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally 118. Rules of procedure.
119.
Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business. 120.
Language to be used in Parliament.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.
CHAPTER III—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT 123 Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament.
Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court. —_ .
Salaries, etc., of Judges.
Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
Appointment of ad hoc judges. ARTICLES 128.
Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court to be a court of record. 130.
Seat of Supreme Court.
Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
131A.
[Omitted.] 132.
Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases.
133.
Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil matters.
134.
Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.
Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.
Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.
Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs.
Transfer of certain cases.
Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc. 143.
Power of President to consult Supreme Court. 144.
Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court.
Rules of Court, etc. 146.
Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.
Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
PART VI THE STATES CHAPTER I— GENERAL 152. Definition.
Governors of States. 154.
Executive power of State.
Qualifications for appointment as Governor.
Oath or affirmation by the Governor. Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain contingencies.
Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
Extent of executive power of State.
Council of Ministers Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.
Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Advocate-General for the State Advocate-General for the State.
Conduct of Government Business Conduct of business of the Government of a State.
Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc. CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE General Constitution of Legislatures in States.
Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.
Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.
Composition of the Legislative Councils. Duration of State Legislatures.
Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.
Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution.
Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses. Special address by the Governor.
Officers of the State Legislature The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
Secretariat of State Legislature.
Conduct of Business Oath or affirmation by members.
Disqualifications of Members Vacation of seats.
Disqualifications for membership.
Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, privileges and immunities of State Legislatures and their Members Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the members and committees thereof.
Salaries and allowances of members.
Legislative Procedure Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other than Money Bills.
Definition of “Money Bills”.
Assent to Bills. .
Bills reserved for consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters Annual financial statement.
Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates. Appropriation Bills.
Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally Rules of procedure.
Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in relation to financial business.
Language to be used in the Legislature.
Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.
CHAPTER V—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES High Courts for States. High Courts to be courts of record.
Constitution of High Courts.
Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court.
Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.
Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.
226.
Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.
CHAPTER VI—SUBORDINATE COURTS 233. Appointment of district judges. 233A.
Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.
243-1. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position.
Audit of accounts of Panchayats.
Elections to the Panchayats.
243L.
Application to Union territories.
243M.
Part not to apply to certain areas.
243N.
Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.
Constitution of Municipalities.
243W .Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc. 243X.
Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.
243Y.
Finance Commission.
2437.
Audit of accounts of Municipalities.
2437A.
Elections to the Municipalities.
2437B.
Application to Union territories.
2437C.
Part not to apply to certain areas.
2437D.
Committee for district planning.
2437E.
Committee for Metropolitan planning.
2437F. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.
244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or both therefor.
PART XI RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES CHAPTER IL—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS Distribution of Legislative Powers 245.
Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.
Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts.
Residuary powers of legislation. 249.
Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national interest.
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.
Legislation for giving effect to international agreements. 254.
Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of procedure only.
Obligation of States and the Union. 257.
Control of the Union over States in certain cases.
Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases.
Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.
Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.
261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings. Disputes relating to Waters 262.
Borrowing by States.
PART XIV SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES CHAPTER I— SERVICES 308.
Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State.
Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State.
All-India services. 16 ARTICLES 312A.
Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of officers of certain services.
Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.
Appointment and term of office of members.
Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.
Functions of Public Service Commissions.
321. Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.
Expenses of Public Service Commissions.
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions.
Tribunals for other matters.
PART XV ELECTIONS 324.
Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission.
325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex. 326.
Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.
Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People.
332.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
334. Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after seventy years. 335.
Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts. 336.
17 ARTICLES 337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian Community.
338. National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs. 361A.
Special provisions as to major ports and acrodromes.
Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions given by the Union.
PART XX AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 368. Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor.
Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List.
Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. 371A.
Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.
Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.
Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.
Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana 371E.
Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.
Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.
371G.
Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram. 371H.
Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council.
Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to the provisions of the Constitution.
Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
[Omitted.] 392. Power of the President to remove difficulties.
SCHEDULES FIRST SCHEDULE L— The States.
II.— The Union territories.
SECOND SCHEDULE PART A— Provisions as to the President and the Governors of States. PART B— [Omiitted.]
PART C— Provisions as to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State.
PART D— Provisions as to the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts.
PART E— Provisions as to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
THIRD SCHEDULE— Forms of Oaths or Affirmations.
FOURTH SCHEDULE— Allocation of seats in the Council of States.
PART A— General.
PART B— Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes.
PART D— Amendment of the Schedule. SIXTH SCHEDULE—Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE— List I— Union List.
List II— State List.
List III— Concurrent List. EIGHTH SCHEDULE— Languages.
TENTH SCHEDULE— Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection.
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE— Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
TWELFTH SCHEDULE— Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc. APPENDIX I— The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954. APPENDIX II— Re-statement, with reference to the present text of the Constitution, of the exceptions and modifications subject to which the Constitution applies to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
APPENDIX III— Extracts from the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 APPENDIX IV— The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003. APPENDIX V— The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.
21 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PREAMBLE WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a '[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the *[unity and integrity of the Nation]; IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
Explanation I1—The power conferred on Parliament by clause (@) includes the power to form a new State or Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union territory to any other State or Union territory. ] 4.
27-8-1966). 23 as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may deem necessary.
Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.— Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if— (a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and (b) (i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or (i) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that Government: Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application.
24 10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.—Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen. 11.
Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.
PART III FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS General 12.
Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the State” includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India. 13.
Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.—(7) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law; (b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.—(/) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children. ?[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.] 1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s.
5-11-1971). 2.
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.
(5) Nothing in ![sub-clauses (d) and (e)] of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.
Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.—(/) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice. (2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate. (3) Nothing in clauses (/) and (2) shall apply— (a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or (b) to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention. *(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless— 1.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe— " [(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases in which, a person may be detained for a period longer than three months under any law providing for preventive detention without obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4)]; **(b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class or classes of cases be detained under any law providing for preventive detention; and ok “*(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an inquiry under "**[sub-clause (a) of clause (4)].
Right against Exploitation 23.Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.—(7) Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service the State shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or class or any of them. 24.
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.—No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
Right to Freedom of Religion 25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.—(/) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law— (a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice; “"Sub-clause (a) shall stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
The words, letters, figures and brackets shall stand substituted as “clause (4)” by ibid. (date yet to be notified).
29 (b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Freedom to manage religious affairs.—Subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the right— (a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes; (b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion; (c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and (d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion—No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. 28.
Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions.—(/) No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (/) shall apply to an educational institution which is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.
Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.—*[(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing for— (a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights, or (b) the taking over of the management of any property by the State for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of the property, or (c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the corporations, or (d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders thereof, or (e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence, shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by “[article 14 or article 19]: Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent:] ®[Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the time being in force or any building or structure standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof. ] (2) In this article,— "[(a) the expression “estate” shall, in relation to any local area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also include— .
The sub-heading “Right to Property” omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people.—'[(/)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.—The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.
Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.—The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.
Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.
Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall endeavour to— (a) promote international peace and security; (b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations; (c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another; and (d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.
Executive power of the Union.—(7) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(3) Nothing in this article shall— (a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or (b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President.
Election of President.—The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of— (a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and (b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. ?[Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of *Pondicherry.] 55.
37 (b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one; (c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and (b)by the total number of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor**** of any State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State.
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be diminished during his term of office. 60.
Oath or affirmation by the President.—Every President and every person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the office solemnly affirm of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well- being of the people of India.".
Procedure for impeachment of the President.—(/) When a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament. (2) No such charge shall be preferred unless— (a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and (b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which the resolution is so passed.
Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(/) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after, and in no case later than six months from, the date of occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he 39 enters upon his office.
The Vice-President of India.—There shall be a Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.—The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the States and shall not hold any other office of profit: Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65, he shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Council of States under article 97.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.
66.
Election of Vice-President.—(/) The Vice-President shall be elected by the ![members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament] in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State be elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Vice-President.
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he— (a) is a citizen of India; (b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and (c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments. Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor®*** of any State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State. 67.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor '*** of a State under any law for the time being in force. 73.
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule. The Attorney-General for India 76.
Attorney-General for India.—(7) The President shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be Attorney-General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
Conduct of Government Business 77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(7) All executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President.
43 instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the President. (3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.
Constitution of Parliament.—There shall be a Parliament for the Union which shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.
Composition of the Council of States.—(/) 2[**** The Council of States] shall consist of— (a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the provisions of clause (3); and (b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States *[and of the Union territories. ] (2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States “[and of the Union territories] shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall consist of 1.ClL.
1-3-1975). 3.The words “Subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule,” omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1974, s.
(4) The representatives of each State '*** in the Council of States shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the ?[Union territories] in the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.
3[81. Composition of the House of the People.—(7) “[Subject to the provisions of article 331 ***], the House of the People shall consist of— (a) not more than °[five hundred and thirty members] chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, and (b) not more than ’[twenty members] to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),— (a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States; and (b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same throughout the State: 8[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to any State so long as the population of that State does not exceed six millions.] (3) In this article, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published: 1.
97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule. 98.
Secretariat of Parliament.—(/) Each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff: Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament.
100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.—(/) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker. The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
'[(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number of members of the House.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum. ]
2[Explanation.—TFor the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.] 3[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.] 4[103.
Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(/) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (/) of article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.] 104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before he has complied with the requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union. Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members 105.
Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(/) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses. (4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People. 108.
Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.—(/) If after a Bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House— (a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or (b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the Bill; or (c¢) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it, the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a dissolution of the House of the People, notify . Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.
(3) Where the President has under clause (/) notified his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall proceed further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified in the notification and, if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to have been passed by both Houses: Provided that at a joint sitting— (a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House, has not been passed by the other House with amendments and returned to the House in which it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such amendments (if any) as are made necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill; (b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed; and the decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible under this clause shall be final.
(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution of the House of the People has intervened since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses to meet therein.
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(/) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States.
Definition of “Money Bills”.—(7) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:— 53 (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India; (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund; (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India; (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure; (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the President for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the House of the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom: Provided that the President may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message, and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent therefrom.
Annual financial statement.—(/) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately— (a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the President.
Appropriation Bills.—(/) As soon as may be after the grants under article 113 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of all moneys required to meet— (a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and (b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(/) The President shall— (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of article 114 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or 1.
55 additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or (b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or grant.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (/) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure. 117.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(/) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (/) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States: Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
Rules of procedure.—(/) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the 56 provisions of this Constitution, its procedure '*** and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (/), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and communications between, the two Houses.
(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the People, or in his absence such person as may be determined by rules of procedure made under clause (3), shall preside.
119.
Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.—Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (/) of article 118 or with any rule or standing order having effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail. 120.
Language to be used in Parliament.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English: Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English” were omitted therefrom.
Restriction on discussion in Parliament.—No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the Judge as hereinafter provided.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.—(/) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament.—(7) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance— 1.
The brackets and words “(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)” ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 (date yet to be notified).
57 (a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and (b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which Parliament would not under this Constitution be competent to enact, it shall be void.
Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court.—(7) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven? other Judges.
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India. !'[124A.
126. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose. 127.
Appointment of ad hoc Judges.—(/) If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, 2[the National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with the previous consent of the President] and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
60 Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that Court unless he consents so to do. 129.
Seat of Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute— (a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or (b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other; or (c¢) between two or more States, if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends: ![Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to such a dispute.]
Y[131A.
Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to questions as to constitutional validity of Central laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s.
4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
132. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases.—(/) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, *[if the High Court certifies under article 134A] that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.
4% * * * * (3) Where such a certificate is given,”** any party in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided 3***.
1-8-1979). N LR W~ 61 (b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.] (2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (/) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has been wrongly decided.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court.
134. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.—(/) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court— (a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or (b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or (c) '[certifies under article 134A] that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court: Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c¢) shall lie subject to such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.
Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.—Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to in clause (/) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or clause (/) of article 134,— (a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and (b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of such judgment, decree, final order or sentence, determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question whether a certificate of the nature referred to in clause (/) of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.] 135. Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.—Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the Supreme Court shall also have jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter to which the provisions of article 133 or article 134 do not apply if jurisdiction and powers in relation to that matter were exercisable by the Federal Court immediately before the commencement of this Constitution under any existing law.
136.
Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (/) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
137.
Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.—Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 19, for “certifies” (w.e.f.
1-8-1979). 2.
Ins. by ibid., s. 20.
62 138. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—(7/) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of any State may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers by the Supreme Court.
Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs.—Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32. ![139A.
Transfer of certain cases.—>[(/) Where cases involving the same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such case that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself: Provided that the Supreme Court may after determining the said questions of law return any case so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such questions to the High Court from which the case has been withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.] (2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do for the ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings pending before any High Court to any other High Court.] 140. Ancillary powers of Supreme Court.—Parliament may by law make provision for conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this Constitution.
Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.—The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India.
142.
Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.—(/) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President may by order? prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of India, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself.
143.
Power of President to consult Supreme Court.—(/) If at any time it appears to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon. 1.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl.
(1) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C.O. 47).
(3) 8[****The minimum number] of Judges who are to sit for the purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference under article 143 shall be five: Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is 1.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save in open Court, and no report shall be made under article 143 save in accordance with an opinion also delivered in open Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save with the concurrence of a majority of the Judges present at the hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent a Judge who does not concur from delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State after he has ceased to hold his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of 65 service of persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department and the administrative powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(6) The administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving in that office, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.
Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General—The Comptroller and Auditor- General shall perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of any other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces respectively. ![150.
Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.—The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may, 2[on the advice of] the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribe.] 151.
Audit reports.—(J) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of a State shall be submitted to the Governor 3*** of the State, who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
PART VI THE STATES “#** CHAPTER L.—GENERAL 152.
Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “State” *[does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir].
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
Extent of executive power of State.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws: Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.
68 (2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislature of the State may from time to time by law determine and, until the Legislature of the State so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
Advocate-General for the State.—(/) The Governor of each State shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court to be Advocate-General for the State.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the Government of the State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may determine. Conduct of Government Business 166.
Conduct of business of the Government of a State.—(7) All executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor.
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business in so far as it is not business with respect to which the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion.
1[* * * * *] 167.
Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each State— (a) to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation; (b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for; and (c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council. CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE General 168.
(4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 23 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 69 (a) in the States of '*** 2 Andhra Pradesh], Bihar,*** 4{Madhya Pradesh], >*** [Maharashtra], "[Karnataka], #*** °[°Tamil Nadu, Telangana] '![and Uttar Pradesh], two Houses; (D) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly.
Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the creation of such a Council in a State having no such Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (/) shall contain such provisions for the amendment of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.
[Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published: Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year '*[2026] have been published, be construed as a reference to the °[2001] census.] (3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine: .
Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.—A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a State unless he— ?[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;] (b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age; and (c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
(2) The Governor may from time to time— (a) prorogue the House or either House; (b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.] 175. Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses.—(7) The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, either House of the Legislature of the State, or both Houses assembled together, and may for that purpose require the attendance of members.
(2) The Governor may send messages to the House or Houses of the Legislature of the State, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislature or otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration. 176.
Special address by the Governor.—(/) At the commencement of *[the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year], 1.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.—The Legislative Council of every State having such Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the Council and shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.
Legislative Procedure 196. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(/) Subject to the provisions of articles 198 and 207 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the House or Houses thereof.
(4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the Legislative Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
(2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second time by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council— (a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or (b) more than one month elapses from the date on which the Bill is laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or (c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the Legislative Assembly does not agree; the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money Bill.
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(/) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council.
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.
Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:— 78 (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the State, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the State; (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of the State, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund; (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State; (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State, or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure; (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the State or the public account of the State or the custody or issue of such money; or (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the Legislative Council under article 198, and when it is presented to the Governor for assent under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
200.
Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President: Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom: Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.
201.
Bills reserved for consideration.—When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom: Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a 79 message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters 202.
Annual financial statement.—(7) The Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses of the Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial statement”. (2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately— (a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State; and (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State— (a) the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other expenditure relating to his office; (b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council; (c) debt charges for which the State is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt; (d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of any High Court; (e) any sums required to satisty any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal; (f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged. 203.
Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.—(/) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the Legislature of any of those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
Appropriation Bills.—(/) As soon as may be after the grants under article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated 80 Fund of the State of all moneys required to meet— (a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and (b)the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before the House or Houses.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the House or either House of the Legislature of the State which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206, no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
205.
Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(/) The Governor shall— (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or (b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a demand for such excess, as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or grant.
Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have power— (a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 204 in relation to that expenditure; (b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of the State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement; (c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year; and the Legislature of the State shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause (/) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made 81 for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
Rules of procedure.—(/) A House of the Legislature of a State may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure!*** and the conduct of its business. (2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province shall have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.
(3) In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to communications between the two Houses.
Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in relation to financial business.—The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the House or Houses of the Legislature of the State in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State, and, if and so far as any provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the House or either House of the Legislature of the State under clause (/) of article 208 or with any rule or standing order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the State under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail. 210.
Language to be used in the Legislature —(/) Notwithstanding anything in Part X VII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in the Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official language or languages of the State or in Hindi or in English: Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of the Legislative Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English” were omitted therefrom: 1.
35 (date yet to be notified). 82 ![Provided that in relation to the *[Legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for the words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words “twenty-five years” were substituted:] 3[Provided further that in relation to the *[Legislatures of the States of °[Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for the words "fifteen years" occurring therein, the words "forty years" were substituted.] 211.
Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.—No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties. 212.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.—(/) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature.—(7) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require: Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the President, promulgate any such Ordinance if— (a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislature; or (b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance— (a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by the Council; and 1.
42, for “Legislature of the State of Mizoram” (w.e.f.
30- 5-1987). 5.
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s.
63, for “Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).
83 (b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, it shall be void: Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of this Constitution relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of a State which is repugnant to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the State which has been reserved for the consideration of the President and assented to by him.
High Courts for States.—****There shall be a High Court for each State. 3[* * * * *] 215.
High Courts to be courts of record.—Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief Justice of a High Court is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose. 5[224.
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, ®[the President may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint] a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge has resumed his duties.
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office after attaining the age of "[sixty-two years].] 8[224A.
86 this Chapter, '[the National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State, may with the previous consent of the President], request any person who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do.] 225.
Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution: 2[Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.] 3[226.
Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 226.] 227.
Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.—>[(/) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.] (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the High Court may— (a) call for returns from such courts; (b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such courts; and (c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such courts.
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders practising therein: Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the Governor.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces. f5)* * * * * 228.
1. CL (7) renumbered as cl.
(4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30 (w.e.f.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f.
3. CL (1) has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.
40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
31 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
CL (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f.
1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 41, for “it shall withdraw the case and may—" (w.e.f.
1-2- 1977). 6.
The words, figures and letter “subject to the provisions of article 131A,” omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, 5. 9 (w.e.f.
Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of State laws.]- Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f.13-4-1978).
229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.—(1) Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer ofthe Court as he may direct: Provided that the Governor of the State 2*** may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after consultation with the State Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the State, the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to make rules for the purpose: Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the Governor of the State 2%, (3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.
3[230.
Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.—(/) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation to a Union territory,— (a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory, be construed as a reference to the President. 231.
Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States.—(/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High Court for two or more States or for two or more States and a Union territory.
Appointment of district judges.—(/) Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates.— The Governor may by public notification direct that the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial service of the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.
[Application of provisions of Part VI to States in Part B of the First Schedule.]-Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
Special provisions with respect to Delhi.—(/) As from the date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and the administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the Lieutenant Governor.
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
Subs. by ibid. 92 territory of ![Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature, respectively; and any reference in that article to “clause (/) of article 239A” shall be deemed to be a reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may be. 239AB.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (/) of article 239A, but every such Ordinance— (a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the resolution; and (b) may be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after obtaining instructions from the President in that behalf. (3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory made after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, it shall be void.] 5% * * * * 240.
Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories.—(/) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Union territory of— (a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 1.
Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (34 of 1973), s.
Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) “district” means a district in a State; (b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level; (c) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part; (d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas; (e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Panchayat; (f) “Population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published; (g) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by public notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a group of villages so specified.
Gram Sabha.—A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
Constitution of Panchayats.—(7) There shall be constituted in every State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate level may not be constituted in a State having a population not exceeding twenty lakhs.
Composition of Panchayats.—(7) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats: Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayat area.
24-4-1993). Original Part IX was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the representation— (a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in the Panchayats at the intermediate level or, in the case of a State not having Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district level; 1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f.
(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayats.
(5) The Chairperson of— (a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and (b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (/) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses () and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of citizens. 243E.
Duration of Panchayats, etc.—(7) Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
(3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed— (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat for such period.
(4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (/) had it not been so dissolved. 243F.
Disqualifications for membership.—(7) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat— (a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned: Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (7), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
243G.
Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to— (a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
97 243H.
Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State may, by law,— (a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits; (b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and limits; (c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also for the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom, as may be specified in the law.
243-1.
Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position.—(/) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as may be within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations to the Governor as to— (a) the principles which should govern— (i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds; (if) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayats; (iti) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State; (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Panchayats; (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the composition of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as members thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
Elections to the Panchayats.—(7) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a State, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule determine: Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election 98 Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats.
Composition of Municipalities.—(/) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide— (a) for the representation in a Municipality of— (i) persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration; (if) the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area; (ii) the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within the Municipal area; (iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5) of article 243S: Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality; (b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.
243S.
Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.—(/) There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards, within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs or more.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— (a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee; () the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be filled.
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of— (a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality; or (b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards Committees.
243T.
Reservation of seats.—(/) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (/) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in 101 every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (/) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens. 243U.
Duration of Municipalities, etc.—(/) Every Municipality, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer: Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its dissolution.
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,— (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Municipality for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under clause (/) had it not been so dissolved.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (7), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
Audit of accounts of Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.
Elections to the Municipalities.—(/) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Municipalities.
Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly: Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
Part not to apply to certain areas.—(/) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (7), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2) of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under any law for the time being in force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (/) subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
Committee for district planning.—(/) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— (a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district; (c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to such Committees; (d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
Committee for Metropolitan planning.—(7) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— 104 (a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees; (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area; (c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of India and the Government of the State and of such organisations and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the functions assigned to such Committees; (d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Committees; (e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan,— (a) have regard to— (i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area; (if) matters of common interest between the Municipalities and the Panchayats, including co- ordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; (iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the Government of the State; (iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India and of the Government of the State and other available resources whether financial or otherwise; (b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect of amending this Constitution. ] PART XI RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS Distribution of Legislative Powers 1.
Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.—(/) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State.
(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the ground that it would have extra- territorial operation.
Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “Union List”). (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to clause (/), the Legislature of any State '*** also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List Il in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”).
(3) Subject to clauses (/) and (2), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
Residuary powers of legislation.—(/) “[Subject to article 246A, Parliament] has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists. 249.
Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national interest.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to *[goods and services tax provided under article 246A or] any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution, it shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force.
111 Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of any such resolution is passed in the manner provided in clause (/), such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year from the date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(J) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to '[goods and services tax provided under article 246A or] any of the matters enumerated in the State List.
(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the issue of a Proclamation of Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period. 251.
Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.—Nothing in articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a State to make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament has under either of the said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by Parliament continues to have effect, be inoperative.
252.
Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.—(/) If it appears to the Legislatures of two or more States to be desirable that any of the matters with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parliament to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to any other State by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State.
Control of the Union over States in certain cases.—(/) The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction to be of national or military importance: Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken as restricting the power of Parliament to declare highways or waterways to be national highways or national waterways or the power of the Union with respect to the highways or waterways so declared or the power of the Union to construct and maintain means of communication as part of its functions with respect to naval, military and air force works.
(3) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the State.
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a State under clause (2) as to the construction or maintenance of any means of communication or under clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection of any railway, costs have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the discharge of the normal duties of the State if such direction had not been given, there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of the extra costs so incurred by the State.
1.
The words and letters “specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
113 [257A. Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union.].— Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
258.
Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
(2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any State may, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with respect to which the Legislature of the State has no power to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the State or officers and authorities thereof.
(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties have been conferred or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties. ’[258A.
Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may, with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the State extends.] 259.
[Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.]—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch.(w.e.f.
1-11-1956). 260.
Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.—The Government of India may by agreement with the Government of any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force. 261.
Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.—(I/) Full faith and credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.
(2) The manner in which and the conditions under which the acts, records and proceedings referred to in clause (/) shall be proved and the effect thereof determined shall be as provided by law made by Parliament.
(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any part of the territory of India shall be capable of execution anywhere within that territory according to law.
Disputes relating to Waters 262.
Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys.—(I) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in clause (7).
Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.—If at any time it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by the establishment of a Council charged with the duty of— (a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen between States; (b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common interest; or (c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in particular, recommendations for the better co-ordination of policy and action with respect to that subject, it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to define the nature of the duties to be performed by it and its organisation and procedure.
PART XII FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS CHAPTER [.—FINANCE General ![264. Interpretation.—In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a Finance Commission constituted under article 280.] 265.
Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law.
Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States.—(7/) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and to the provisions of this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or part of the net proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of India”, and all revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution. 267.
Contingency Fund.—(/) Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of India” into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115 or article 116.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the State” into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor 2#** of the State to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or article 206.
Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the States.—(/) Such stamp duties """ as are mentioned in the Union List shall be levied by the Government of India but shall be collected— (a)in the case where such duties are leviable within any ?[Union territory], by the Government of India, and (b)in other cases, by the States within which such duties are respectively leviable. (2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within any State shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to that State.
Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States.— *[(/) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the consignment of goods *[except as provided in article 269A] shall be levied and collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned and shall be deemed to have been assigned to the States on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the manner provided in clause (2).
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause,— (a) the expression "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods" shall mean taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce; (b) the expression “taxes on the consignment of goods” shall mean taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
(2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by Parliament by law.] °[(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a “[sale or purchase of, or consignment of, goods] takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 8[269A.
(3) In this article, “prescribed” means,— (7) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and (i) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission.] 271.
Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union.—Notwithstanding anything in articles 269 and 270, Parliament may at any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in those articles “[except the goods and services tax under article 246A,] by a surcharge for purposes of the Union and the whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) In this article, the expression “tax or duty in which States are interested” means— (a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any State; or (b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State. 275.
Savings.—Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, were being lawfully levied by the Government of any State or by any municipality or other local authority or body for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area may, notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees are mentioned in the Union List, continue to be levied and to be applied to the same purposes until provision to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.
[Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with regard to certain financial matters.]- Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc.—(/) In the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, “net proceeds” means in relation to any tax or duty the proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for the purposes of those provisions the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, whose certificate shall be final.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other express provision of this Chapter, a law made by Parliament or an order of the President may, in any case where under this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may be, assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which the proceeds are to be calculated, for the time from or at which and the manner in which any payments are to be made, for the making of adjustments between one financial year and another, and for any other incidental or ancillary matters.
Finance Commission.—(/) The President shall, within two years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary, by order constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President.
(2) Parliament may by law determine the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as members of the Commission and the manner in which they shall be selected.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to— (a) the distribution between the Union and the States of the net proceeds of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them under this Chapter and the allocation between the States of the respective shares of such proceeds; (b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India; ![(bb) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State;] ?[(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Municipalities in the State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State;] 3[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission by the President in the interests of sound finance.
(4) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the performance of their functions as Parliament may by law confer on them. 281.
Recommendations of the Finance Commission.—The President shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of this Constitution together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues.—The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws.
Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts.—(/) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of India, their payment into the public account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the President.
Exemption from taxes on electricity.—Save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity (whether produced by a Government or other persons) which is— (a) consumed by the Government of India, or sold to the Government of India for consumption by that Government; or 1.
122 (b) consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway by the Government of India or a railway company operating that railway, or sold to that Government or any such railway company for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, and any such law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall secure that the price of electricity sold to the Government of India for consumption by that Government, or to any such railway company as aforesaid for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other consumers of a substantial quantity of electricity.
288. Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricity in certain cases.— (I)Save in so far as the President may by order otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed, distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing law or any law made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or river- valley.
Explanation.—The expression “law of a State in force” in this clause shall include a law of a State passed or made before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, or authorise the imposition of, any such tax as is mentioned in clause (/), but no such law shall have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of the President, received his assent; and if any such law provides for the fixation of the rates and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or orders to be made under the law by any authority, the law shall provide for the previous consent of the President being obtained to the making of any such rule or order. 289.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.
Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.—Where under the provisions of this Constitution the expenses of any court or Commission, or the pension payable to or in respect of a person who has served before the commencement of this Constitution under the Crown in India or after such commencement in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State, then, if— (a) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India, the court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of a State, or the person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of a State; or (b) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of a State, the court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of the Union or another State, or the person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of the Union or another State, there shall be charged on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the State or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the other State, such contribution in respect of the expenses or pension as may be agreed, or as may in default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to 123 be appointed by the Chief Justice of India. '[290A.
Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.—A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of ?[Tamil Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund established in that State for the maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-Cochin.] 291.
[Privy purse sums of Rulers.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, 5.
2 (wef.
28-12-1971).
CHAPTER IL.—BORROWING 292.
Borrowing by the Government of India.—The executive power of the Union extends to borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by Parliament by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.
Borrowing by States.—(7) Subject to the provisions of this article, the executive power of a State extends to borrowing within the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such conditions as may be laid down by or under any law made by Parliament, make loans to any State or, so long as any limits fixed under article 292 are not exceeded, give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any State, and any sums required for the purpose of making such loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) A State may not without the consent of the Government of India raise any loan if there is still outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government, or in respect of which a guarantee has been given by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government.
PART XIII TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA 301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.
1-11-1956). 127 services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for the Governor *** of a State or such person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act. 310.
(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post under the Union or a State holds office during the pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, of the Governor '*** of the State, any contract under which a person, not being a member of a defence service or of an all-India service or of a civil service of the Union or a State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such a post may, if the President or the Governor *#**_ as the case may be, deems it necessary in order to secure the services of a person having special qualifications, provide for the payment to him of compensation, if before the expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or he is, for reasons not connected with any misconduct on his part, required to vacate that post. 311.
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in— (a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India or a Province thereof; (b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability or obligation under article 314 as originally enacted.
CHAPTER II.—PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS 315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.—(/) Subject to the provisions of this article, there shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
(2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be one Public Service Commission for that group of States, and if a resolution to that effect is passed by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the Legislature of each of those States, Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a Joint State Public Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint Commission) to serve the needs of those States.
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as may be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes of the law.
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if requested so to do by the Governor #** of a State, may, with the approval of the President, agree to serve all or any of the needs of the State.
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public Service Commission or a State Public Service Commission shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as references to the Commission serving the needs of the Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the particular matter in question.
316.
Appointment and term of office of members.—(/) The Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and in the case of a State Commission, by the Governor of the State: Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every Public Service Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their respective appointments have held office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, and in computing the said period of ten years any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which a person has held office under the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian State shall be included.
3[(IA) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, those duties shall, until some person appointed under clause (/) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint for the purpose.] (2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty- five years, and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of 2[sixty-two years], whichever is earlier: Provided that— (a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing under his hand addressed, in the 1. The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2, for “sixty years” (w.e.f.
7-9-1976). 130 case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commission, to the Governor '*** of the State, resign his office; (b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (/) or clause (3) of article 317.
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible for re-appointment to that office.
Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.—(/) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission shall only be removed from his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf under article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
(2) The President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor '*** in the case of a State Commission, may suspend from office the Chairman or any other member of the Commission in respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under clause (/) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (I), the President may by order remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission if the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be,— (a) is adjudged an insolvent; or (b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or (c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.
Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office— (a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; 1.
319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office— (a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; 1.
320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.—(/) It shall be the duty of the Union and the State Public Service Commissions to conduct examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the services of the State respectively.
(5) All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President or the Governor '*** of a State shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, as soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of the State may make during the session in which they are so laid.
Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.—An Act made by Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of a State may provide for the exercise of additional functions by the Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission as respects the services of the Union or the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.
Expenses of Public Service Commissions.—The expenses of the Union or a State Public Service Commission, including any salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the members or staff of the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of the State.
Reports of Public Service Commissions.—(/) It shall be the duty of the Union Commission to present annually to the President a report as to the work done by the Commission and on receipt of such report the President shall cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) A law made under clause (/) may— (a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the Union and a separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more States; (b) specity the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; (c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals; 1.
(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.
Tribunals for other matters.—(/) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.
134 followed by the said tribunals; (d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals; (e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending before any court or any other authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment; (f) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.
Explanation.—In this article, “appropriate Legislature”, in relation to any matter, means Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance with the provisions of Part XI.] PART XV ELECTIONS 324.
Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.—The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than ?[eighteen years] of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
327.
Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to Legislatures.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.
328. Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect to elections to such Legislature.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and in so far as provision in that behalf is not made by Parliament, the Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, the elections to the House or either House of the Legislature of the State including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.
329.
Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—>[Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution **** ] (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called in question in any court; (b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature.
5[329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker.]- Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
36 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 3% * * * * PART XVI SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES 330.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People.— 1.
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch. (w.e.f.
1-11-1956). 2.
Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988, s.
2, for “twenty-one years” (w.e.f. 28-3-1989).
3. Subs, by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s.
3, for certain words (w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
4.The words, figures and letters “but subject to the provisions of article 329A™ omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s.
4. 136 (I) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for — (a) the Scheduled Castes; ![(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; and] (¢) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
Representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House of the People.— Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People. 332.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.—(7) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, "[except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the Legislative Assembly of every State 8+, (2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (/) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State. .
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f.
Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.— Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor "*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein, ![nominate one member of that community to the Assembly]. 334.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely :— (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 1.
140 him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; (f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.] ![338B.
Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.—(/) The President may at any time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States '*%*.
The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may consider necessary or desirable.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to ?[a State] as to the drawing up and execution of schemes specified in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the 1.
The words and letters “specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f.
1-11-1956).
2.
Subs. by ibid., for “any such state”. 143 Scheduled Tribes in the State.
Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes.—(1/) The President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for the purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such grants should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Scheduled Castes.—(/) The President ![may with respect to any State *[or Union territory], and where it is a State ¥***, after consultation with the Governor **** thereof,] by public notification®, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State °[or Union territory, as the case may be.] (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (/) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification. 342.
Scheduled Tribes.—(/) The President '[may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State ****, after consultation with the Governor **** thereof,] by public notification'®, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause () any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by 1.
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.
Official language of the Union.—(/) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before such commencement: Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order? authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form of Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union. (3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law provide for the use, after the said period of fifteen years, of— (a) the English language, or (b) the Devanagari form of numerals, for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.—(/) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such other members representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission. (2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to— (a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of the Union; (b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the official purposes of the Union; (c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in article 348; (d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes of the Union; 1.
(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members, of whom twenty shall be members of the House of the People and ten shall be members of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (/) and to report to the President their opinion thereon.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after consideration of the report referred to in clause (5), issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of that report.
Official language or languages of a State.—Subject to the provisions of articles 346 and 347, the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State: Provided that, until the Legislature of the State otherwise provides by law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes within the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
346.
Official language for communication between one State and another or between a State and the Union.—The language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official language for communication between one State and another State and between a State and the Union: Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the official language for communication between such States, that language may be used for such communication.
Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the population of a State.—On a demand being made in that behalf the President may, if he is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a State desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that State, direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.
348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.— (I) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides— (a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court, (D) the authoritative texts— (i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, 146 (ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor *** of a State, and (iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State, shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (/), the Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in that State: Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree or order passed or made by such High Court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (/), where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor '*** of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause, a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of the Governor '*** of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this article.
349.
Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to language.—During the period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the language to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (/) of article 348 shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament without the previous sanction of the President, and the President shall not give his sanction to the introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except after he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (/) of article 344 and the report of the Committee constituted under clause (4) of that article.
Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage.—It shall be the endeavour of every State and of every local authority within the State to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the provision of such facilities.
Special Officer for linguistic minorities.—(7) There shall be a Special Officer for linguistic minorities to be appointed by the President.
Directive for development of the Hindi language.—It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
21 (w.e.f.
1-11-1956).
147 PART XVIII EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 352. Proclamation of Emergency.—(/) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or ![armed rebellion], he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect *[in respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be specified in the Proclamation].
3[Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.] 4[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (/) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (/) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation unless the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75) that such a Proclamation may be issued has been communicated to him in writing.
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one month unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament: Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the People has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during the period of one month referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.
(5) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause (4): Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period of six months from the date on which it would otherwise have ceased to operate under this clause: Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days, a resolution approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.
1.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
37, for “internal disturbances” (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
2.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.
48 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
3.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
37 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
4.
Subs. by ibid., for cls.
(2), (2A) and (3).
148 (6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed by either House of Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of that House present and voting.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing clauses, the President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause (/) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation if the House of the People passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, such Proclamation.
Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.—While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, then— (a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to any State as to the manner in which the executive power thereof is to be exercised; (b) the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter shall include power to make laws conferring powers and imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities of the Union as respects that matter, notwithstanding that it is one which is not enumerated in the Union List: 3[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory of India,— (i) the executive power of the Union to give directions under clause (a), and (i) the power of Parliament to make laws under clause (b), shall also extend to any State other than a State in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.] 354.
(2) Every order made under clause (/) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance.— It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two months unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament: Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during the period of two months referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of 3[six months from the date of issue of the Proclamation:] Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a 1.
Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies.— (I) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may by order declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of °[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order.
Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to the provisions of article 143, neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which was entered into or executed before the commencement of this Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the Government of the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and which has or has been continued in operation after such commencement, or in any dispute in respect of any right accruing under or any liability or obligation arising out of any of the provisions of this Constitution relating to any such treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument.
(2) In this article— (a) “Indian State” means any territory recognised before the commencement of this Constitution by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as being such a State; and (b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised before such commencement by His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as the Ruler of any Indian State.
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution “foreign State” means any State other than India: Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the President may by order* declare any State not to be a foreign State for such purposes as may be specified in the order.
(2) If the concurrence of the Government of the State referred to in paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause (/) or in the second proviso to sub-clause (d) of that clause be given before the Constituent Assembly for the purpose of framing the Constitution of the State is convened, it shall be placed before such Assembly for such decision as it may take thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article, the President may, by public notification, declare that this article shall cease to be operative or shall be operative only with such exceptions and modifications and from such date as he may specify: Provided that the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2) shall be necessary before the President issues such a notification.
161 (a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, '[and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be], Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that a report on the working of each of these boards will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly; (b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; and (c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education and vocational training, and adequate opportunities for employment in services under the control of the State Government, in respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.] [371A.
Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s.
85, for “the rest of Maharashtra” (w.e.f.
1-5-1960). 2.
Ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s.
2 (w.e.f.
1-12-1963).
162 Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district shall be the Chairman ex officio of the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of the regional council shall be elected by the members thereof from amongst themselves; (ii) the qualifications for being chosen as, and for being, members of the regional council; (iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and allowances, if any, to be paid to members of, the regional council; (iv) the procedure and conduct of business of the regional council; (v) the appointment of officers and staff of the regional council and their conditions of services; and (vi) any other matter in respect of which it is necessary to make rules for the constitution and proper functioning of the regional council.
Explanation..—In this article, the Kohima, Mokokchung and Tuensang districts shall have the same meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.] '[371B.
Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order made with respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in [Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and such number of other members of that Assembly as may be specified in the order and for the modifications to be made in the rules of procedure of that Assembly for the constitution and proper functioning of such committee.] 3[371C.
Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order made with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State, for the modifications to be made in the rules of business of the Government and in the rules of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special responsibility of the Governor in order to secure the proper functioning of such committee.
(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “Hill Areas” means such areas as the President may, by order, declare to be Hill areas.] 4[371D.
Special provisions with respect to °[the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana].—°[(/) The President may by order made with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana, provide, having regard to the requirement of each State, for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of such State, in the matter of public employment and in the matter of education, and different provisions may be made for various parts of the States.] 1.
(3) The President may, by order, provide for the constitution of an Administrative Tribunal for ![the State of Andhra Pradesh and for the State of Telangana] to exercise such jurisdiction, powers and authority [including any jurisdiction, power and authority which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority] as may be specified in the order with respect to the following matters, namely:— (a) appointment, allotment or promotion to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the order; (b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the order; (c) such other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the State or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State or to such class or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the order.
(7) The High Court for the State shall not have any powers of superintendence over the Administrative Tribunal and no court (other than the Supreme Court) or tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority in respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power or authority of, or in relation to, the Administrative Tribunal.
169 Constitution, all the law in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.
(2) For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any law in force in the territory of India into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by order' make such adaptations and modifications of such law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemed— (a) to empower the President to make any adaptation or modification of any law after the expiration of ?[three years] from the commencement of this Constitution; or (b) to prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.
Explanation I—The expression “law in force” in this article shall include a law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
Explanation II—Any law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well as effect in the territory of India shall, subject to any such adaptations and modifications as aforesaid, continue to have such extra-territorial effect.
Power of the President to adapt laws.—(1) For the purposes of bringing the provisions of any law in force in India or in any part thereof, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by that Act, the President may by order* made before the first day of November, 1957, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil or criminal, pending in the Federal Court at the commencement of this Constitution shall stand removed to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the same, and the judgments and orders of the Federal Court delivered or made before the commencement of this Constitution shall have the same force and effect as if they had been delivered or made by the Supreme Court.
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate to invalidate the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty in Council to dispose of appeals and petitions from, or in respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court within the territory of India in so far as the exercise of such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and any order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after the commencement of this Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution.
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament by law to give effect to the provisions of this article.
Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to the provisions of the Constitution.—All courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of India, shall continue to exercise their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
'[Any such Judge shall, notwithstanding that he is not a citizen of India, be eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or other Judge of any other High Court.] (2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian State corresponding to any State specified in Part B of the First Schedule holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (/) and (2) of article 217 but subject to the proviso 1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.
(3) In this article, the expression “Judge” does not include an acting Judge or an additional Judge.
377.
Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—The Auditor-General of India holding oftice immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless he has elected otherwise, become on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under clause (3) of article 148 in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to hold office until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions which were applicable to him immediately before such commencement. 378.
Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.—(/) The members of the Public Service Commission for the Dominion of India holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public Service Commission for the Union and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (/) and (2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such commencement to such members.
(2) The Members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or of a Public Service Commission serving the needs of a group of Provinces holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public Service Commission for the corresponding State or the members of the Joint State Public Service Commission serving the needs of the corresponding States, as the case may be, and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (/) and (2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such commencement to such members. ! [378A.
Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.— Notwithstanding anything contained in article 172, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh as constituted under the provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five years from the date referred to in the said section 29 and no longer and the expiration of the said period shall operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.] 379.—391.
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch. (w.e.f.
1-11- 1956).
392.
Power of the President to remove difficulties.—(7/) The President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that this Constitution shall, during such period as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient: Provided that no such order shall be made after the first meeting of Parliament duly constituted under Chapter IT of Part V. (2) Every order made under clause (/) shall be laid before Parliament.
(3) The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by article 391 shall, before the commencement of this Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of the Dominion of India. 1.
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
24 (w.e.f.
1-11-1956).
172 PART XXII SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, '[AUTHORITATIVE TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS 393.
Short title.—This Constitution may be called the Constitution of India.
Commencement.—This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324, 366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions of this Constitution shall come into force on the twenty-sixth day of January, 1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution as the commencement of this Constitution.
[394A.
Authoritative text in the Hindi language.—(/) The President shall cause to be published under his authority,— (a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language, signed by the members of the Constituent Assembly, with such modifications as may be necessary to bring it in conformity with the language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of Central Acts in the Hindi language, and incorporating therein all the amendments of this Constitution made before such publication; and (b) the translation in the Hindi language of every amendment of this Constitution made in the English language.
(2) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under clause (/) shall be construed to have the same meaning as the original thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing any part of such translation, the President shall cause the same to be revised suitably.
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under this article shall be deemed to be, for all purposes, the authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language. ] 395.
Repeals.—The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f.
9-12-1987).
2. Ins. by s.
3, ibid.
173 Name 1.
Andhra Pradesh 2. Assam 3.
Bihar °[4. Gujarat ![FIRST SCHEDULE [Articles 1 and 4] 1.
THE STATES Territories %[ The territories specified in sub-section (/) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-section (/) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959] *[and the territories specified in section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014]. The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the territories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 *[and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962] °[and the territories specified in sections 5, 6 and 7 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971] ®[and the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.]
"[The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territories specified in clause (a) of sub- section (/) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (/) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and the territories specified in clause () of sub-section (/) of section 3 of the first mentioned Act ®[and the territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000].]
The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province.
The territories specified in section 11 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 ''[and the territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960] '?[but excluding the territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (Ninth .
Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 (47 of 1959), s.
Added by the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, s.
Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 (47 of 1959), s.
Meghalaya The territories specified in section 5 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971] ®[and the territories referred to in Part 1 of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] [22.
Arunachal Pradesh 2[25.
The territories specified in section 3 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.]
The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner’s Province of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The territory specified in section 6 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The territories specified in section 4 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.] .
There shall be paid to the President and to the Governors of the States '*** the following emoluments per mensem, that is to say:— The President ...
2.There shall also be paid to the President and to the Governors of the States **** such allowances as were payable respectively to the Governor-General of the Dominion of India and to the Governors of the corresponding Provinces immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
The President and the Governors of *[the States] throughout their respective terms of office shall be entitled to the same privileges to which the Governor-General and the Governors of the corresponding Provinces were respectively entitled immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
4.While the Vice-President or any other person is discharging the functions of, or is acting as, President, or any person is discharging the functions of the Governor, he shall be entitled to the same emoluments, allowances and privileges as the President or the Governor whose functions he discharges or for whom he acts, as the case may be.
There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly "*** and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of ®[a State] such salaries and allowances 1.
180 as were payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and, where the corresponding Province had no Legislative Council immediately before such commencement, there shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the State such salaries and allowances as the Governor of the State may determine.
(3) Nothing in sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph shall apply to a Judge who, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,— (a) was holding office as the Chief Justice of the Federal Court and has become on such commencement the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court under clause (/) of article 374, or (b) was holding office as any other Judge of the Federal Court and has on such commencement become a Judge (other than the Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court under the said clause, during the period he holds office as such Chief Justice or other Judge, and every Judge who so becomes the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court shall, in respect of time spent on actual service as 1.
(4) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall receive such reasonable allowances to reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory of India and shall be afforded such reasonable facilities in connection with travelling as the President may from time to time prescribe.
(5) The rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave allowances) and pension of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be governed by the provisions which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, were applicable to the Judges of the Federal Court.
10. '[(I) There shall be paid to the Judges of High Courts, in respect of time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to say,— The Chief Justice .
182 Part B of the First Schedule and has on such commencement become the Chief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in the said Schedule as amended by the said Act, shall, if he was immediately before such commencement drawing any amount as allowance in addition to his salary, be entitled to receive in respect of time spent on actual service as such Chief Justice, the same amount as allowance in addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.] 11.
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) the expression “Chief Justice” includes an acting Chief Justice, and a “Judge” includes an ad hoc Judge; (b) “actual service” includes— (i) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge or in the performance of such other functions as he may at the request of the President undertake to discharge; (i) vacations, excluding any time during which the Judge is absent on leave; and (iti) joining time on transfer from a High Court to the Supreme Court or from one High Court to another.
PARTE PROVISIONS AS TO THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 12. (1) There shall be paid to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India a salary at the rate of *four thousand rupees per mensem.
(3) The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be governed or shall continue to be governed, as the case may be, by the provisions which were applicable to the Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and all references in those provisions to the Governor-General shall be construed as references to the President. *The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be paid a salary equal to the salary of the Judges of the Supreme Court vide s. 3 of the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971).
6 (w.e.f. 22-9- 2017).
183 THIRD SCHEDULE [Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 164(3), 188 and 219]" Forms of Oaths or Affirmations | Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union:— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God thatI will bear true faith solemnly affirm and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, ![that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.” II Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union:— “I, A.B., doswear in the name of God that I will not directly or solemnly affirm indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.” 21 A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to Parliament:— “I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seatinthe Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.”
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament:— “I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in_the name of God solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”] * See also arts.
84 (a) and 173 (a).
1.
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s.
5 (w.e.f.
5-10-1963). 2.
Subs. by ibid., for Form III. v Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:— “I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of India) do swear in the name of God thatI will bear true solemnly affirm faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, ![that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” v Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State:— “I, A.B., doswear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution solemnly affirm of India as by law established, ![that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of .......... and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.” VI Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State:— “I, AB., do swear in the name of God thatI will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal solemnly affirm to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for the State of .................... except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State:— “I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution solemnly affirm of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”] 1.
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s.
5 (w.e.f.
5-10-1963). 2.
Subs. by ibid., for form VIL 185 VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court:— “I, AB., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) ............... do swear in the name of God that Iwill bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as solemnly affirm by law established, ![that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” 1.
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s.
Meghalaya ......cc.ooeveeeerereieeieieeeceeiserene 1 PRIZTIT SIKKIM oo 1 PRIZSH Mizotalh soesmmmeermsmmrmasmms 1] *['[’[29.]
Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “State” '*#* does not include the ?[States of Assam, *[, {Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.]]] 2.
Executive power of a State in Scheduled Areas.—Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the executive power of a State extends to the Scheduled Areas therein.
Report by the Governor °>*#* to the President regarding the administration of Scheduled Areas.—The Governor “#*# of each State having Scheduled Areas therein shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Scheduled Areas in that State and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas. PART B ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF SCHEDULED AREAS AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 4.
Tribes Advisory Council.—(/) There shall be established in each State having Scheduled Areas therein and, if the President so directs, also in any State having Scheduled Tribes but not Scheduled Areas therein, a Tribes Advisory Council consisting of not more than twenty members of whom, as nearly as may be, three-fourths shall be the representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State: Provided that if the number of representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State is less than the number of seats in the Tribes Advisory Council to be filled by such representatives, the remaining seats shall be filled by other members of those tribes.
39, for “Meghalaya and Tripura” (w.e.f.
5. The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may be” omitted by ibid.
190 5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor'*** may by public notification direct that any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification and any direction given under this sub-paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
(2) The Governor'*** may make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area. In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may— (a) prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area; (b) regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area; (c) regulate the carrying on of business as money-lender by persons who lend money to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area.
(3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Governor %% may repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any existing law which is for the time being applicable to the area in question.
(5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless the Governor **** making the regulation has, in the case where there is a Tribes Advisory Council for the State, consulted such Council.
PART C SCHEDULED AREAS 6. Scheduled Areas.—(/) In this Constitution, the expression “Scheduled Areas” means such areas as the President may by order® declare to be Scheduled Areas.
(2) The President may at any time by order*— (a) direct that the whole or any specified part of a Scheduled Area shall cease to be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area; ’[(aa) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State after consultation with the Governor of that State; (b) alter, but only by way of rectification of boundaries, any Scheduled Area; 1.
PART D AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEDULE 7.
Amendment of the Schedule.—(7) Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended.
192 SIXTH SCHEDULE [Articles 244(2) and 275(1)] Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in '[the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram] ?1.
(2) If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or areas inhabited by them into autonomous regions.
(3) The Governor may, by public notification,— (a) include any area in *[any of the Parts] of the said table, (b) exclude any area from 3[any of the Parts] of the said table, (¢) create a new autonomous district, (d) increase the area of any autonomous district, (e) diminish the area of any autonomous district, (f) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so as to form one autonomous district, 3[(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district], (g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district: Provided that no order shall be made by the Governor under clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this sub- paragraph except after consideration of the report of a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule: ®[Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this sub-paragraph may contain such incidental and consequential provisions (including any amendment of paragraph 20 and of any item in any of the Parts of the said Table) as appear to the Governor to be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of the order.
7892, Constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils.— '°[(/) There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district consisting of not more than thirty members, of whom not more than four persons shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage.] .
N T O Sy 193 (2) There shall be a separate Regional Council for each area constituted an autonomous region under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of this Schedule.
(3) Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a body corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of (name of district)” and “the Regional Council of (name of region)”, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the administration of an autonomous district shall, in so far as it is not vested under this Schedule in any Regional Council within such district, be vested in the District Council for such district and the administration of an autonomous region shall be vested in the Regional Council for such region.
(5) In an autonomous district with Regional Councils, the District Council shall have only such powers with respect to the areas under the authority of the Regional Council as may be delegated to it by the Regional Council in addition to the powers conferred on it by this Schedule with respect to such areas.
(6) The Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils in consultation with the existing tribal Councils or other representative tribal organisations within the autonomous districts or regions concerned, and such rules shall provide for— (a) the composition of the District Councils and Regional Councils and the allocation of seats therein; (b) the delimitation of territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to those Councils; (c) the qualifications for voting at such elections and the preparation of electoral rolls therefor; (d) the qualifications for being elected at such elections as members of such Councils; (e) the term of office of members of '[Regional Councils]; (f) any other matter relating to or connected with elections or nominations to such Councils; (g) the procedure and the conduct of business ?[(including the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy)] in the District and Regional Councils; (h) the appointment of officers and staff of the District and Regional Councils. ![(6A) The elected members of the District Council shall hold office for a term of five years from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Council after the general elections to the Council, unless the District Council is sooner dissolved under paragraph 16 and a nominated member shall hold office at the pleasure of the Governor: Provided that the said period of five years may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation or if circumstances exist which, in the opinion of the Governor, render the holding of elections impracticable, be extended by the Governor for a period not exceeding one year at a time and in any case where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation not extending beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate: Provided further that a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of office of the member whom he replaces.] (7) The District or the Regional Council may after its first constitution make rules *[with the approval of the Governor] with regard to the matters specified in sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph and may also make ?[rules with like approval] regulating— (a) the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and their procedure and the conduct of their business; and (b) generally all matters relating to the transaction of business pertaining to the administration of the district or region, as the case may be: 1.
Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s.
74 and Fourth Sch., for “such councils” (w.e.f.
2-4-1970).
2.
Ins. by ibid.
3.
Ins. by ibid.
194 Provided that until rules are made by the District or the Regional Council under this sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph shall have effect in respect of elections to, the officers and staff of, and the procedure and the conduct of business in, each such Council.
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far as they relate to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom: Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the Bodoland Territorial Council, together with the message requesting that the said Council will reconsider the law or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when the law is so returned, the said Council shall consider the law accordingly within a period of six month from the date of receipt of such message and, if the law is again passed by the said Council with or without amendments it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.”.
196 an autonomous district in respect of all areas within the district except those which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the district shall have power to make laws with respect to— (a) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart, of land, other than any land which is a reserved forest for the purposes of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other non-agricultural purposes or for any other purpose likely to promote the interests of the inhabitants of any village or town: Provided that nothing in such laws shall prevent the compulsory acquisition of any land, whether occupied or unoccupied, for public purposes ![by the Government of the State concerned] in accordance with the law for the time being in force authorising such acquisition; (b) the management of any forest not being a reserved forest; (c) the use of any canal or water-course for the purpose of agriculture; (d) the regulation of the practice of jhum or other forms of shifting cultivation; (e) the establishment of village or town committees or councils and their powers; (f) any other matter relating to village or town administration, including village or town police and public health and sanitation; (g) the appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen; (h) the inheritance of property; %[ (/) marriage and divorce;] (j) social customs. (2) In this paragraph, a “reserved forest” means any area which is a reserved forest under the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, or under any other law for the time being in force in the area in question.
(3) All laws made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect. ’4.
Administration of justice in autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—(/) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of areas within the district other than those which are under the authority of the Regional Councils, if any, within the district may constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases between the parties all of whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other than suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule apply, to the exclusion of any court in the State, and may appoint suitable persons to be members of such village councils or presiding officers of such courts, and may also appoint such officers as may be necessary for the administration of the laws made under paragraph 3 of this Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Regional Council for an autonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf by the Regional Council or, if in respect of any area within an autonomous district there is no Regional Council, the District Council for such district, or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, shall exercise the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all suits and cases triable by a village council or court constituted under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph within such region or area, as the case may be, other than those to which the provisions of sub- paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule apply, and no other court except the High Court and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction over such suits or cases.
197 (3) The High Court '*** shall have and exercise such jurisdiction over the suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph apply as the Governor may from time to time by order specify.
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating— (a) the constitution of village councils and courts and the powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph; (b) the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts in the trial of suits and cases under sub- paragraph (1) of this paragraph; (c) the procedure to be followed by the Regional or District Council or any court constituted by such Council in appeals and other proceedings under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph; (d) the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils and courts; (e) all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the provisions of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph.
The words “of Assam” omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s.
71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f.
21-1-1972).
2.
Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s.
74 and Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
3.
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s.
71(i) and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f.
21-1-1972).
198 5.
Conferment of powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898!, on the Regional and District Councils and on certain courts and officers for the trial of certain suits, cases and offences.—(/) The Governor may, for the trial of suits or cases arising out of any law in force in any autonomous district or region being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or for the trial of offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment for a term of not less than five years under the Indian Penal Code or under any other law for the time being applicable to such district or region, confer on the District Council or the Regional Council having authority over such district or region or on courts constituted by such District Council or on any officer appointed in that behalf by the Governor, such powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or, as the case may be, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898!, as he deems appropriate, and thereupon the said Council, court or officer shall try the suits, cases or offences in exercise of the powers so conferred.
(2) The Governor may withdraw or modify any of the powers conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.
(3) Save as expressly provided in this paragraph, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall not apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or in any autonomous region to which the provisions of this paragraph apply.
See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). .
Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and Fourth Sch. (w.e.f.
2-4-1970). . Subs. by ibid., for “paragraph 6”. .
Subs. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974 (56 of 1974), s.
4, for “cattle pounds” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974). .
The words “of Assam or Meghalaya, as the case may be” omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f.
21-1-1972). .
Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s.
74 and Fourth Sch., for sub-paragraph (2) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
DR W - = 199 (3) The accounts of the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council shall be kept in such form as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, with the approval of the President, prescribe.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall cause the accounts of the District and Regional Councils to be audited in such manner as he may think fit, and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor- General relating to such accounts shall be submitted to the Governor who shall cause them to be laid before the Council.] 8.
Power of District Council to make regulations for the control of money-lending and trading by non-tribals.—(1) The District Council of an autonomous district may make regulations for the regulation and control of money-lending or trading within the district by persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the district.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may— (a) prescribe that no one except the holder of a licence issued in that behalf shall carry on the business of money-lending; (b) prescribe the maximum rate of interest which may be charged or be recovered by a money- lender; (c) provide for the maintenance of accounts by money-lenders and for the inspection of such accounts by officers appointed in that behalf by the District Council; (d) prescribe that no person who is not a member of the Scheduled Tribes resident in the district shall carry on wholesale or retail business in any commodity except under a licence issued in that behalf by the District Council : Provided that no regulations may be made under this paragraph unless they are passed by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the total membership of the District Council: Provided further that it shall not be competent under any such regulations to refuse the grant of a licence to a money-lender or a trader who has been carrying on business within the district since before the time of the making of such regulations. (3) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
(2) Any direction given under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
"[12A.
Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya to autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State of Meghalaya.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— (a) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional Council in the State of Meghalaya with respect to any matter specified in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule or if any provision of any regulation made by a District Council or a Regional Council in that State under paragraph 8 or paragraph 10 of this Schedule, is repugnant to any provision of a law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya with respect to that matter, then, the law or regulation made by the District Council 1.
2, so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (3), namely: — “(4) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.”. 2.
Paragraph 12 has been amended to its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2, (w.e.f.
12-9-1995) as under,- ‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words and figure “matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule” shall be substituted.’. 3.
Paragraph 12 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, as under,— ‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), in clause (a), for the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B of this Schedule” shall be substituted.’.
202 or, as the case may be, the Regional Council whether made before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya, shall, to the extent of repugnancy, be void and the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya shall prevail; (b) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.] ![12AA.
Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State of Tripura.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— (a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura in respect of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case the, District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs, and the District Council in giving such direction with respect to any Act may direct that the Act shall, in its application to that district or such region or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks fit; (b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the notification; (c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect. 12B.
Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram to autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State of Mizoram.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— (a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram in respect of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case, the District Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region, by public notification, so directs, and the District Council, in giving such direction with respect to any Act, may direct that the Act shall, in its application to such district or region or any part thereof, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks fit; (b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram to which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall apply to such district or region, or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the notification; (c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State of Mizoram, or shall apply to 1.
Subs. by Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988, s.
2, for paragraphs 12AA and 12B (w.e.f.
16-12-1988).
Paragraph 12AA was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s.
4 (w.e.f.
1-4-1985).
203 such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.] 13.
Estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to autonomous districts to be shown separately in the annual financial statement.—The estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district which are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the Consolidated Fund of the State '*** shall be first placed before the District Council for discussion and then after such discussion be shown separately in the annual financial statement of the State to be laid before the Legislature of the State under article 202.
Appointment of Commission to inquire into and report on the administration of autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—(1) The Governor may at any time appoint a Commission to examine and report on any matter specified by him relating to the administration of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State, including matters specitied in clauses (c), (d), (¢) and (f) of sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of this Schedule, or may appoint a Commission to inquire into and report from time to time on the administration of autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State generally and in particular on— (a) the provision of educational and medical facilities and communications in such districts and regions; (b) the need for any new or special legislation in respect of such districts and regions; and (c) the administration of the laws, rules and regulations made by the District and Regional Councils; and define the procedure to be followed by such Commission.
(2) The report of every such Commission with the recommendations of the Governor with respect thereto shall be laid before the Legislature of the State by the Minister concerned together with an explanatory memorandum regarding the action proposed to be taken thereon by >[the Government of the State.] (3) In allocating the business of the Government of the State among his Ministers the Governor may place one of his Ministers specially in charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State.
Annulment or suspension of acts and resolutions of District and Regional Councils.—(/) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that an act or resolution of a District or a Regional Council is likely to endanger the safety of India 3[or is likely to be prejudicial to public order], he may annul or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider necessary (including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council) to prevent the commission or continuance of such act, or the giving of effect to such resolution.
16-12-1988) as under,-- ‘(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words “by the Legislature of the State”, the words “by him” shall be substituted; (b) the proviso shall be omitted.’.
(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State and shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless, before the expiry of that period it has been approved by that State Legislature.] 1.
Paragraph 16 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988) s. 2, (w.e.f.
16-12-1988) as under,-- ‘(a) in sub-paragraph (1), the words “subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the State” occurring in clause (b), and the second proviso shall be omitted; (b) for sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-paragraph shall be substituted, namely:— “(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, along with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State.”.”.
Transitional provisions.—(/) As soon as possible after the commencement of this Constitution the Governor shall take steps for the constitution of a District Council for each autonomous district in the State under this Schedule and, until a District Council is so constituted for an autonomous district, the administration of such district shall be vested in the Governor and the following provisions shall apply to the administration of the areas within such district instead of the foregoing provisions of this Schedule, namely:— (a) no Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall apply to any such area unless the Governor by public notification so directs; and the Governor in giving such a direction with respect to any Act may direct that the Act shall, in its application to the area or to any specified part thereof, have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit; (b) the Governor may make regulations for the peace and good government of any such area and any regulations so made may repeal or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any existing law which is for the time being applicable to such area.
(2) Any direction given by the Governor under clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
The North Cachar Hills District. 2.
"[The Karbi Anglong District.] 8[3.
Khasi Hills District.
The Chakma District. 4[2.
The Mara District.
1-4-1985). .
The words “The Mizo District” omitted by the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s.
13 (wee.f.
29-4-1972). .
Ins. by the Mizoram District Council (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order, 1972, published in the Mizoram Gazette, 1972, dated the 5" May, 1972, Vol.
I, Pt.
I, p.
17 (w.e.f.
29-4-1972). .
Subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s.
Autonomous regions in the Union territory of Mizoram to be autonomous districts and transitory provisions consequent thereto.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule,— (a) every autonomous region existing immediately before the prescribed date in the Union territory of Mizoram shall, on and from that date, be an autonomous district in that Union territory (hereafter referred to as the corresponding new district) and the Administrator thereof may, by one or more orders, direct that such consequential amendments as are necessary to give effect to the provisions of this clause shall be made in paragraph 20 of this Schedule (including Part III of the table appended to that paragraph) and thereupon the said paragraph and the said Part III shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly; (b) every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the prescribed date (hereafter referred to as the existing Regional Council) shall, on and from that date and until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district, be deemed to be the District Council of that district (hereafter referred to as the corresponding new District Council).
(4) The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may, by one or more orders, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— (a) the transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Council (including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to the corresponding new District Council; (b) the substitution of the corresponding new District Council for the existing Regional Council as a party to the legal proceedings to which the existing Regional Council is a party; (c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the existing Regional Council to or by the corresponding new District Council, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re-employment; (d) the continuance of any laws made by the existing Regional Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or 1.
After paragraph 20B, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s.
Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions. — The Governor in the discharge of his functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs (1), (6), sub-paragraph (6A) excluding the first proviso and sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 10, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub- paragraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be, take such action as he considers necessary in his discretion.” . 2.
After paragraph 20B, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram, by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s.
2, namely: — “20BB.
Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions.-The Governor, in the discharge of his functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs (1) and (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, and if he thinks it necessary, the District Council or the Regional Council concerned, take such action as he considers necessary in his discretion.” .
209 amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf until such laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority; (e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as the Administrator considers necessary.
20C.
Interpretation.—Subject to any provision made in this behalf, the provisions of this Schedule shall, in their application to the Union territory of Mizoram, have effect— (1) as if references to the Governor and Government of the State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239, references to State (except in the expression "Government of the State") were references to the Union territory of Mizoram and references to the State Legislature were references to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram; (2) as if— (a) in sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4, the provision for consultation with the Government of the State concerned had been omitted; (b) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, for the words "to which the executive power of the State extends", the words "with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram has power to make laws" had been substituted; (c) in paragraph 13, the words and figures “under article 202” had been omitted.
Amendment of the Schedule.—(/) Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so amended.
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national highways.
Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament by law to be national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the rule of the road on such waterways. 25.
Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on tidal waters; provision of education and training for the mercantile marine and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.
26. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the safety of shipping and aircraft.
27. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major ports, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of port authorities therein. 28.
Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and marine hospitals. 29.
Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.
Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national waterways in mechanically propelled vessels.
31.
Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of communication.
32.
Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards property situated in a State '*** subject to legislation by the State, save in so far as Parliament by law otherwise provides. 2% * * * * 34.
Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States. 35.
Public debt of the Union. 36.
Currency, coinage and legal tender; foreign exchange.
Foreign loans. 38.
Reserve Bank of India.
Post Office Savings Bank.
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers. 42.
Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, including banking, insurance and financial corporations, but not including co-operative societies.
44. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether trading or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including universities.
Banking.
46.
Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like instruments.
Insurance.
Stock exchanges and futures markets.
49. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise marks. 50.
Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of India or transported from one State to another.
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources; petroleum and petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable.
54.
Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters.
58.
Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies; regulation and control of manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other agencies.
59.
Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export, of opium.
Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition.
61.
Industrial disputes concerning Union employees. 62.
The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institution financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. 63.
The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the '[Delhi University; the University established in pursuance of article 371E;] any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.
Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance.
Union agencies and institutions for— (a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the training of police officers; or (b) the promotion of special studies or research; or (c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of crime.
66.
Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions.
Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains, *[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance.
The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations.
Census.
Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service Commission.
Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of President and Vice- President; the Election Commission.
73.
Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.
Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
76.
Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States.
Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court (including contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
78. Constitution and organisation '[(including vacations)] of the High Courts except provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts; persons entitled to practise before the High Courts. ?[79.
Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.] 80.
Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that State without the consent of the Government of the State in which such area is situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State.
81. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine.
82.
Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals and companies; taxes on the capital of companies. 87.
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air; taxes on railway fares and freights. 90.
Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures markets.
Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts. I * * * * ?[92A.
Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] *[92B.
Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 4% * * * * 93.
Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List. 94.
Inquires, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in this List.
Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction.
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court. 97.
Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons detained therein; arrangements with other States for the use of prisons and other institutions.
Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local self- government or village administration.
6. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India. 8.
Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State; ancient and historical monuments and records other than those ?[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance.
13.
Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other means of communication not specified in List I; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and List III with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles.
Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases.
Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice.
16.
Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass.
17.
Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I. 18.
Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization.
Fisheries.
22.
Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; encumbered and attached estates. 23.
Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union.
Industries subject to the provisions of “[entries 7 and 52] of List I. 25. Gas and gas-works.
Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List IIL.
27.
Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III.
Markets and fairs.
Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness.
31.
Inns and inn-keepers. 32.
Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co- operative societies.
33.
Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
Betting and gambling.
Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State.
Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament.
Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.
217 57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III. 58.
59. Tolls.
60.
Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments. 61.
Capitation taxes. ![62. Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council. ] 63.
Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in the provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty.
Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List.
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court.
Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List IT and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power.
Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and documents.
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those ?[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance.
Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural land) declared by law to be evacuee property.
Acquisition and requisitioning of property.] 43.
Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands, including arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears, arising outside that State.
44.
Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.
45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified in List IT or List IIL 46.
Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List. 47.
Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court.
29. The Bombay Inams (Kutch Area) Abolition Act, 1958 (Bombay Act XCVIII of 1958). 30.
The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XVI of 1960). 31.
The Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 (Gujarat Act XXXIII of 1963), except in so far as this Act relates to an alienation referred to in sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of section 2 thereof.
36. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950). 37.
40. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1959). 41.
The Madras Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Madras Act XXIV of 1956).
The Rajasthan Zamindari and Biswedari Abolition Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act VIII of 1959).
The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act, 1960 (Central Act 24 of 1960).
The Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Central Act 33 of 1960).
64.
The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Central Act 43 of 1960).] 1[65.
The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 35 of 1969).
The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Kerala Act 25 of 1971).] 2[67. The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 (Andhra Pradesh Act 1 of 1973).
68. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act I of 1973). 69.
73. The Himachal Pradesh Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Himachal Pradesh Act 19 of 1973). 74.
The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1973).
123.The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation, 1971 (3 of 1971).
The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (Central Act 13 of 1976).
129. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Central Act 20 of 1976).
The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971).
169. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972). 170.
The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972). 171.
The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974).
179. Amendments made to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951) by the Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Uttar Pradesh Act 21 of 1971) and the Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 1974). 180.
The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976 (Central Act 15 of 1976).
201. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964).
The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 1980).
The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (Maharashtra Act 41 of 1966), sections 36, 36A and 36B.
The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and the Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977).
The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 1956 (Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956).
235. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 29 of 1976). 236.
248. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1969 (West Bengal Act 23 of 1969). 249.
The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977 (West Bengal Act 36 of 1977). 250.
The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act 44 of 1979).
The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981 (West Bengal Act 33 of 1981).
254. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1982 (West Bengal Act 23 of 1982). 255.
The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1984 (West Bengal Act 41 of 1984).
The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 (Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1994).] 2[258.
259. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 1956 (Bihar Act 22 of 1956). 260.
277. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989). 278.
280. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1986 (West Bengal Act 19 of 1986). 1.
The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 12 of 1991).] Explanation.—Any acquisition made under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act III of 1955), in contravention of the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) “House” means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State; (b) ‘legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or 2*** paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the members of that House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions; (c) “original political party”, in relation to a member of a House, means the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2; (d) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule.
Disqualification on ground of defection.—(/) Subject to the provisions of *[paragraphs 4 and 5], a member of a House belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House— (a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or (b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention.
(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after such election.
(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, a person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or nominated as such) shall,— 1 Added by the Constitution (Fifty-Second Amendment) Act, 1985, s.
6, (w.e.f.
1-3-1985).
2.
Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f.
1-1-2004) 3. Subs. by ibid., for “para 3, 4 and 5”.
234 (i) where he was a member of political party immediately before such commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, to have been elected as a member of such House as a candidate set up by such political party; (i) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph or, as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated member of the House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph.
Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger.—(/) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his original political party— (a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or (b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group, and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
Exemption.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule,— (a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a member of another political party; or (b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins such political party after he ceases to hold such office.
Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection.—(/) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final: Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State within the meaning of article 212.
Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule.
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the House for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.] * Paragraph 7 declared invalid for want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to cl.
(2) of article 368 as per majority opinion in Kihoto Hollohon V's. Zachilhu and others AIR 1993 SC 412.
236 — oo N B R _ = - o 2 —_ 22. 23.
27 28. 29.
YELEVENTH SCHEDULE (Article 243G) Agriculture, including agricultural extension.
Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation.
Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development.
Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry.
Fisheries.
Social forestry and farm forestry.
Small scale industries, including food processing industries.
Khadi, village and cottage industries. .
Rural housing. .
Drinking water.
Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication.
Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity.
Non-conventional energy sources.
Poverty alleviation programme.
Education, including primary and secondary schools.
Technical training and vocational education.
Adult and non-formal education.
Libraries. .
Cultural activities. Markets and fairs.
Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries.
Family welfare.
Women and child development.
Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded.
Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Public distribution system.
'[TWELFTH SCHEDULE (Article 243W) Urban planning including town planning.
Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
Planning for economic and social development.
Roads and bridges.
Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.
Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management.
Fire services.
Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects.
Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded. .
Slum improvement and upgradation.
Urban poverty alleviation.
Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds.
Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums.
Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.
Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences.
Short title and commencement.—(/) *** (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. * * * * * 3.
Amendment of article 22.—In article 22 of the Constitution,— (a) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— ‘(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of two months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention: Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court: Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (a) of clause (7).
